why can i return from a foreign holiday
quarantine
and see my family at christmas but i
can't from university
right now devi i'm going to come to you
on this because obviously events have
happened here and
have happened in scotland today
hundreds over a thousand at least
students self-isolating at universities
in scotland there are also some
in liverpool and possibly elsewhere by
now and what we're hearing
is that because of the rules in scotland
different household not mixing
students at universities in scotland
cannot go home
are going to be banned from pubs and
restaurants and may not go home for
christmas
what's going on well i can only speak to
the scientific advice and kind of the
perspective from public
health which is that we've seen the
scenario play out in the united states
over the past
six to eight weeks a lot of students
come back movement of people across the
country or even across the world
into cramped kind of student living
which means it's very hard to keep
separate with shared bathrooms
you know shared kitchens and then adding
on top of that you have an age group who
wants to socialize who wants to be
around each other
and are least likely to comply with
rules which they feel are most
restrictive on them
but least beneficial and i guess let me
ask as a global public health expert do
you think given how quickly this has
happened i mean scottish universities
have been back
more or less for fortnight now do you
think they should have come back at all
i think they should have only come back
under strict guidelines i've done
an article eight weeks ago when i asked
ask for testing on arrival testing after
five days to make sure you catch all
cases
you know regular testing on campuses um
you know ventilation
um bubbling i'm you know all the
different measures you would have in
place to make a campus what we might
call
cobit safe and it just seems that i mean
that's all i guess i can do as an
academic is lay out
as my perspective on what could make
campuses go back safely or when it's a
choice for
you know how you actually implement
those well we've got some students
amongst as
as chelsea would have it amongst our
audience let's hear from uh cinema
you've got your hand up you're
you're starting your your first year
you're a fresher effectively
i am yes and i just like to say
young people like myself are being
blamed for the second spike in kovac 19
and hearing for example matt hancock's
condescending comment on and i quote
don't kill your grandma by catching
coronavirus and passing it on
is very frustrating because the youth
has been instructed to eat out to help
out
we've been told to go back to school and
that is exactly what we've done
yet we are still the ones being blamed
tia you're starting your first year as
well
yeah so i'm starting my first year um
and
i've been told that universities are
returning for young people's mental
health which i fully understand and i
think that's extremely important
obviously
but the fact is that we're returning to
university
physically for four hours so i have
eight hours of lessons a week
four hours of which are currently face
to face so basically
i'm going and exposing myself to so many
other people from all different parts of
the country being brought together
sharing a kitchen i know like some of
the halls share a kitchen
and toilets with like 10 people
so we're being asked to come together
for what is essentially four hours
of face to face a week because we're not
allowed to socialize so i don't think
that's
massively beneficial for our mental
health either especially now
i haven't yet gone to university and now
i'm being told if you go
you might not be able to come home for
christmas so that leaves me with the
decision of
do i like save my mental health now
which apparently going to university
will
or do i stay away so that i can actually
stay with my family and see people
more often than just four hours a week
and be at home for christmas
well tia those are horrible decisions
that you are having to make
i feel for you i have to say hearing
that louise
i mean labour has supported the
government in trying
in may trying to make sure that
education continues seeing what is
happening
uh more in scotland i guess scotland's
ahead of
england particularly um is this the
right approach
well we've been incredibly constructive
towards the government and have
attempted to support them in in all the
measures to tackle the virus because
it's not helpful for the public to hear
different public health responses
according to party lines but in terms of
universities
schools i mean we supported schools
reopening um
we want we want to see uh students uh
going back to university but
again with millions of students moving
across the country
it was always going to be there was
always going to be
an increased demand for testing there
needed to be clear guidance in order to
make uh as devi said camp
campuses covered secure um and there
needed to be
um a proper track and trace system
underpinning that
um where we are
do you think it is right that students
um
who are we're not sure yet what's going
to happen in england but students in
scotland for example won't be able to go
home
i think it's it's grossly unfair isn't
it to tell students that they can return
to university
then tell them no i don't think it is
right i don't think it is right that
we're asking students to return to
university
their first time living away from home
them being told they can't go out and
socialize and potentially not return
home to their families
you know tia said that's about um
improving your mental health i imagine
that being incredibly deteriorative your
mental health ed
it's incredibly tough on these students
and let's remember there was
an added problem for them and the
universities
because of the way the government
mishandled the exam system
they end up having to allow more people
to be able to go to university and that
was very late in the day
so universities have been really
struggled even got massive financial
problems
to make their campuses and their
accommodation covered secure
and suddenly there was a massive impact
uh increasing students because of the
incompetence with the a-levels system
so the government have made it even more
difficult for universities even more
difficult for students
and and again i don't see apologies i
don't see them taking action giving more
support to the universities
who are having to struggle with this and
and alec you know
this has got public health implications
and you can't just allow
universities and students just to fend
for themselves they need extra support
i don't see why they're not getting it
peter well a number of points
there i mean i'm not an expert in
education but
i think what's clear is that young
people were always going to mingle and
there was always going to be
transmission
and and then it's whether you you're of
the view that
it's relatively safe and you know they
are a long way from granny so you could
perhaps even argue this is the time for
them
to get it but then the point is i guess
students go go elsewhere
i guess i needed that to be a plan and i
think schools have the problem as well i
i got a letter today from an email sorry
from a
um a guy who who sits on the
the parents um
board of governors and he was making the
point that
he's got teachers kind of having to
cover cleans and putting all the
measures in
and they're really struggling to stay on
top and and to deliver
teaching at home for the kids that can't
come in and they need more resources so
you know i was able to pay for for extra
extra cleaning
and extra measures um because i'm
business
and i think maybe maybe it might help if
the government could look at how they
can support
to to work out the right protocol and to
provide some extra funding for
for schools with universities to help
them deliver
a kind of safe environment so alex
what's the plan then if if we see
repeaters
there's already been an outbreak uh in
liverpool i think 87
cases if we see in england what's
happening in scotland i say we're just a
couple of weeks behind what's the plan
well i think the first thing i have to
acknowledge that it is uh
it has been a tough time for young
people i have two daughters who are
university age
and it has been a very tough time for
them but
going out at this point about making
sure that uh you know students are if
they're able to go to university uh
younger children to be able to be in
school i think that's really important
for their
mental health being and i think it's
really important in terms of their
development
um we are working with the university
sector uh to
ensure that they have the advice in
terms of keeping premises safe
and going back can you can you see is is
is it
can you see a situation happening in
england as it's happening in scotland
uh where university students are not
allowed to go home
well i'm not allowed to go to the pub i
i hope we really don't get to that
but that does require is that in your
planning at the moment
um we've always said that uh and we've
said this right from the start of this
pandemic is that we keep all options uh
on the table
under review but the point now is that
we want people to follow
the rules and the guidance that we put
in place now and if we're able to do
that
we will be able to get this under
control and we will come out the other
well you remember what that was like i'm
sure and how realistic is it to expect
people
well when they get you go to university
away from home for the first time to say
you know nice to meet you i'm saying two
meters away from from literally
everybody no fiona
it is of course very difficult but
actually uh from what i've observed uh
young people are also very responsible
they understand the reason that we ask
people to follow that the guidance and
the rules and going back to the support
for universities
we are making financial support for
universities available uh obviously they
are they will have less foreign students
coming so that support is being provided
it's this idea that somehow we are
leaving the sector unsupported i don't
think that's fair
alex you asked the question what do you
think about what you've heard
i think what alex said about how going
to university helps your mental health
me not going home for christmas is
so much worse than me going to
university
when you're not going to university you
mean yeah i would have just stayed home
uh because i'm in my second year i just
stayed home and done all of my course
online
which i'm basically doing anyway i'm
having all but two hours
of online lectures and i would have just
stayed home and had chris's my family
because
uh i'm my mum's only son my dad has
cancer this year
and they've had such a difficult year
and now
for them to know considering in the sage
minutes on the first september
they knew the risk of higher education
uh
infection for them just to say now oh
there's a chance you will miss christmas
after all they have been through it's
just unacceptable
well look alex i hope that doesn't
happen um and i'm terribly sorry about
obviously
your father as well and tyr and and um
cinnamon are you starting your first
year good luck with that